README.md, before:

# blazegraph-runner
`blazegraph-runner` provides a simple command-line wrapper for the [Blazegraph](https://www.blazegraph.com) open source 
RDF database. It provides operations on an "offline" database, so that you can easily load data or execute queries against 
a Blazegraph journal file, without needing to run it as an HTTP SPARQL server.

## Usage

```
Usage

 blazegraph-runner [options] command [command options]

Options

   --informat   : Input format
   --journal    : Blazegraph journal file
   --outformat  : Output format
   --properties : Blazegraph properties file

Commands

   construct <query> <output> : SPARQL construct

   dump [command options] <output> : Dump Blazegraph database to an RDF file
      --graph : Named graph to load triples into

   load [command options] <data-files> ... : Load triples
      --base=STRING
      --graph              : Named graph to load triples into
      --use-ontology-graph

   reason [command options] : Materialize inferences
      --append-graph-name=STRING : If a target-graph is not provided, append this text to the end of source graph name to use as target graph for inferred statements.
      --merge-sources            : Merge all selected source graphs into one set of statements before reasoning. Inferred statements will be stored in provided `target-graph`, or else in the default graph. If `merge-sources` is false (default), source graphs will be reasoned separately and in parallel.
      --ontology                 : Ontology to use as rule source. If the passed value is a valid filename, the ontology will be read from the file. Otherwise, if the value is an ontology IRI, it will be loaded from the database if such a graph exists, or else, from the web.
      --parallelism=NUM          : Maximum graphs to simultaneously either read from database or run reasoning on.
      --reasoner=STRING          : Reasoner choice: 'arachne' (default) or 'whelk'
      --rules-file               : Reasoning rules in Jena syntax.
      --source-graphs            : Space-separated graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning (must be passed as one shell argument).
      --source-graphs-query      : File name or query text of SPARQL select used to obtain graph names on which to perform reasoning. The query must return a column named `source_graph`.
      --target-graph             : Named graph to store inferred statements.

   select <query> <output> : SPARQL select

   update <update> : SPARQL update
```

## Commands

There are a number of general options that apply to all commands:

- **journal**: Blazegraph journal file
- **properties**: Blazegraph properties file. If this is not set, a [default properties file](https://github.com/balhoff/blazegraph-runner/blob/master/src/main/resources/org/renci/blazegraph/blazegraph.properties) is used that includes named graphs and text indexing.
- **informat**: Input format. Valid values for this option depend on the command.
- **outformat**: Output format. Valid values for this option depend on the command.


### Load

Load RDF data from files into a Blazegraph journal. A list of files or folders can be passed to the command; folders will 
be recursively searched for data files.

```
blazegraph-runner load --journal=blazegraph.jnl --graph="http://example.org/mydata" --informat=rdfxml mydata1.rdf mydata2.rdf
```

If your data files are OWL ontologies, `blazegraph-runner` can efficiently search within each file to find the ontology IRI 
if you want to use it as the target named graph:

```
blazegraph-runner load --journal=blazegraph.jnl --use-ontology-graph=true --informat=rdfxml go.owl
```

If you set `--use-ontology-graph=true` and also provide a value for `--graph`, the `--graph` will be used as a fallback value 
in the case that an ontology IRI is not found.

### Dump

Export RDF data from a Blazegraph journal to a file. If a value for `--graph` is provided, only data from that graph is 
exported. If `--graph` is not provided, data from the default graph will be exported. *In the future this command should 
be extended to dump all graphs to separate file or dump all data to a quad format.*

```
blazegraph-runner dump --journal=blazegraph.jnl --graph="http://example.org/mydata" --outformat=turtle mydata.ttl
```

### Select

Query a Blazegraph journal using SPARQL SELECT. Results can be output as TSV, XML, or JSON.

```
blazegraph-runner select --journal=blazegraph.jnl --outformat=tsv myquery.rq mydata.tsv
```

### Construct

Query a Blazegraph journal using SPARQL CONSTRUCT. Results can be output as Turtle, RDFXML, or N-triples.

```
blazegraph-runner construct --journal=blazegraph.jnl --outformat=turtle myquery.rq mydata.ttl
```

### Update

Apply a SPARQL UPDATE to modify data in a Blazegraph journal.

```
blazegraph-runner update --journal=blazegraph.jnl myupdate.rq
```

### Reason

Materialize inferences derived from data in a Blazegraph journal, and store the inferred triples back to the journal. Reasoning rules are applied in-memory using the [Arachne](https://github.com/balhoff/arachne) reasoner. This command has a number of different options:

- **rules-file**: a file of reasoning rules in [Jena rules format](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/inference/index.html) (not all Jena rule constructs are supported by Arachne).
- **ontology**: an OWL ontology to convert to reasoning rules. If the passed value is a valid filename, the ontology will be read from the file. Otherwise, if the value is an IRI, it will be loaded from the Blazegraph journal if such a graph exists, or else, `blazegraph-runner` will attempt to download it from the web.
- **target-graph**: the graph IRI in which to store inferred triples
- **append-graph-name**: if `target-graph` is not provided, text provided with this option will be appended to the graph name of a given source graph to create a target graph IRI in which to store inferred triples.
- **source-graphs**: space-separated list of graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning (must be passed as one shell argument).
- **source-graphs-query**: file name or query text of SPARQL SELECT query used to obtain graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning. The query must return a column named `source_graph`.
- **merge-sources**: whether to merge all selected source graphs into one set of statements before reasoning. Inferred statements will be stored in provided `target-graph`, or else in the default graph. If `merge-sources` is false (default), source graphs will be reasoned separately and in parallel, with results stored either together in `target-graph` or separately using `append-graph-name`.
- **parallelism**: set the number of concurrent workers to use for reasoning on a set of graphs. Arachne is single-threaded, but if reasoning is applied independently to a set of graphs, this can occur in parallel.

This command line will select all named graphs from the database, materialize inferences for each one separately (up to 8 simultaneously), using rules derived from the RO ontology, and store the inferred triples in separate graphs corresponding to each source graph:
```
blazegraph-runner reason --journal=blazegraph.jnl --ontology="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro.owl" --source-graphs-query=graphs.rq --append-graph-name="#inferred" --merge-sources=false --parallelism=8
```

`graphs.rq` could look like this:

```sparql
SELECT DISTINCT ?source_graph
WHERE {
  GRAPH ?source_graph { ?s ?p ?o . }
}
```

## Building

If you clone the `blazegraph-runner` repository and want to build locally, you will need to have [SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org) installed.

#### Package a local version to run from the repo:

```
sbt stage
./target/universal/stage/bin/blazegraph-runner <options>
```

#### Zip up a distribution

```
sbt universal:packageZipTarball
```

Commit message:

Documents default behavior for graph designation when loading from directories (#105)

README.md, after:

# blazegraph-runner
`blazegraph-runner` provides a simple command-line wrapper for the [Blazegraph](https://www.blazegraph.com) open source 
RDF database. It provides operations on an "offline" database, so that you can easily load data or execute queries against 
a Blazegraph journal file, without needing to run it as an HTTP SPARQL server.

## Usage

```
Usage

 blazegraph-runner [options] command [command options]

Options

   --informat   : Input format
   --journal    : Blazegraph journal file
   --outformat  : Output format
   --properties : Blazegraph properties file

Commands

   construct <query> <output> : SPARQL construct

   dump [command options] <output> : Dump Blazegraph database to an RDF file
      --graph : Named graph to load triples into

   load [command options] <data-files> ... : Load triples
      --base=STRING
      --graph              : Named graph to load triples into
      --use-ontology-graph

   reason [command options] : Materialize inferences
      --append-graph-name=STRING : If a target-graph is not provided, append this text to the end of source graph name to use as target graph for inferred statements.
      --merge-sources            : Merge all selected source graphs into one set of statements before reasoning. Inferred statements will be stored in provided `target-graph`, or else in the default graph. If `merge-sources` is false (default), source graphs will be reasoned separately and in parallel.
      --ontology                 : Ontology to use as rule source. If the passed value is a valid filename, the ontology will be read from the file. Otherwise, if the value is an ontology IRI, it will be loaded from the database if such a graph exists, or else, from the web.
      --parallelism=NUM          : Maximum graphs to simultaneously either read from database or run reasoning on.
      --reasoner=STRING          : Reasoner choice: 'arachne' (default) or 'whelk'
      --rules-file               : Reasoning rules in Jena syntax.
      --source-graphs            : Space-separated graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning (must be passed as one shell argument).
      --source-graphs-query      : File name or query text of SPARQL select used to obtain graph names on which to perform reasoning. The query must return a column named `source_graph`.
      --target-graph             : Named graph to store inferred statements.

   select <query> <output> : SPARQL select

   update <update> : SPARQL update
```

## Commands

There are a number of general options that apply to all commands:

- **journal**: Blazegraph journal file
- **properties**: Blazegraph properties file. If this is not set, a [default properties file](https://github.com/balhoff/blazegraph-runner/blob/master/src/main/resources/org/renci/blazegraph/blazegraph.properties) is used that includes named graphs and text indexing.
- **informat**: Input format. Valid values for this option depend on the command.
- **outformat**: Output format. Valid values for this option depend on the command.


### Load

Load RDF data from files into a Blazegraph journal. A list of files or folders can be passed to the command; folders will 
be recursively searched for data files.

```
blazegraph-runner load --journal=blazegraph.jnl --graph="http://example.org/mydata" --informat=rdfxml mydata1.rdf mydata2.rdf
```

When loading multiple files (or a folder with files), by default each file is loaded under its own graph, currently named using the file's path. (This can be exploited in a SPARQL query, for example to distinguish between triples coming from different files.)

If your data files are OWL ontologies, `blazegraph-runner` can efficiently search within each file to find the ontology IRI 
if you want to use it as the target named graph:

```
blazegraph-runner load --journal=blazegraph.jnl --use-ontology-graph=true --informat=rdfxml go.owl
```

If you set `--use-ontology-graph=true` and also provide a value for `--graph`, the `--graph` will be used as a fallback value 
in the case that an ontology IRI is not found.

### Dump

Export RDF data from a Blazegraph journal to a file. If a value for `--graph` is provided, only data from that graph is 
exported. If `--graph` is not provided, data from the default graph will be exported. *In the future this command should 
be extended to dump all graphs to separate file or dump all data to a quad format.*

```
blazegraph-runner dump --journal=blazegraph.jnl --graph="http://example.org/mydata" --outformat=turtle mydata.ttl
```

### Select

Query a Blazegraph journal using SPARQL SELECT. Results can be output as TSV, XML, or JSON.

```
blazegraph-runner select --journal=blazegraph.jnl --outformat=tsv myquery.rq mydata.tsv
```

### Construct

Query a Blazegraph journal using SPARQL CONSTRUCT. Results can be output as Turtle, RDFXML, or N-triples.

```
blazegraph-runner construct --journal=blazegraph.jnl --outformat=turtle myquery.rq mydata.ttl
```

### Update

Apply a SPARQL UPDATE to modify data in a Blazegraph journal.

```
blazegraph-runner update --journal=blazegraph.jnl myupdate.rq
```

### Reason

Materialize inferences derived from data in a Blazegraph journal, and store the inferred triples back to the journal. Reasoning rules are applied in-memory using the [Arachne](https://github.com/balhoff/arachne) reasoner. This command has a number of different options:

- **rules-file**: a file of reasoning rules in [Jena rules format](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/inference/index.html) (not all Jena rule constructs are supported by Arachne).
- **ontology**: an OWL ontology to convert to reasoning rules. If the passed value is a valid filename, the ontology will be read from the file. Otherwise, if the value is an IRI, it will be loaded from the Blazegraph journal if such a graph exists, or else, `blazegraph-runner` will attempt to download it from the web.
- **target-graph**: the graph IRI in which to store inferred triples
- **append-graph-name**: if `target-graph` is not provided, text provided with this option will be appended to the graph name of a given source graph to create a target graph IRI in which to store inferred triples.
- **source-graphs**: space-separated list of graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning (must be passed as one shell argument).
- **source-graphs-query**: file name or query text of SPARQL SELECT query used to obtain graph IRIs on which to perform reasoning. The query must return a column named `source_graph`.
- **merge-sources**: whether to merge all selected source graphs into one set of statements before reasoning. Inferred statements will be stored in provided `target-graph`, or else in the default graph. If `merge-sources` is false (default), source graphs will be reasoned separately and in parallel, with results stored either together in `target-graph` or separately using `append-graph-name`.
- **parallelism**: set the number of concurrent workers to use for reasoning on a set of graphs. Arachne is single-threaded, but if reasoning is applied independently to a set of graphs, this can occur in parallel.

This command line will select all named graphs from the database, materialize inferences for each one separately (up to 8 simultaneously), using rules derived from the RO ontology, and store the inferred triples in separate graphs corresponding to each source graph:
```
blazegraph-runner reason --journal=blazegraph.jnl --ontology="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro.owl" --source-graphs-query=graphs.rq --append-graph-name="#inferred" --merge-sources=false --parallelism=8
```

`graphs.rq` could look like this:

```sparql
SELECT DISTINCT ?source_graph
WHERE {
  GRAPH ?source_graph { ?s ?p ?o . }
}
```

## Building

If you clone the `blazegraph-runner` repository and want to build locally, you will need to have [SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org) installed.

#### Package a local version to run from the repo:

```
sbt stage
./target/universal/stage/bin/blazegraph-runner <options>
```

#### Zip up a distribution

```
sbt universal:packageZipTarball
```
